Title: Hotelling law
Date: 2014-12-23 08:07
Author: Aleksejus Kononovicius
Tags: Economics, Interactive models, competition, video, median voter theorem
Slug: hotelling-law
Status: published

In the begging of XXth
century economist Harold Hotelling noted that competitors tend to make
their products very similar. Currently this observation is known as
minimal differentiation principle or Hotelling law. In order to
understand what and why is going on, let us imagine one dimensional
city.<!--more-->

Evidently a real-life city can't be one dimensional - we live in three
dimensions, thus our cities are also three dimensional. But lets
consider this idea as a generalization - a city with a single main
street. All houses in this city would be positioned along that main
street, there would be no smaller side streets. Let us introduce two
competitors into the city - two pharmacies (though the business itself
is irrelevant). What would the citizens like? They, of course, would
prefer that their shortest path would be as small as possible. Any
citizen will prefer pharmacy, which is nearer to him. In order to have
the average shortest path to any pharmacy as small as possible we would
have to position pharmacies at 1/4 and 3/4 of main streets length. Both
pharmacies in this case would have an equal share of customers.

![optimal placement](/uploads/2014/hotelling-optimal.png)

The problem is that business would like to have as large share of
customers as possible. Note that any pharmacy may increase its share
(and thus decreasing their opponents share) by moving near their
competitor, but staying on the city center side. In such case the
pharmacy that made a move would now have a share of 75%, while its
competitor would have the remaining 25%. The competitor would retaliate
by moving nearer the center, effectively taking over a larger share in
the market. These "moves" would continue until both pharmacies would end
up in the city center. Moving from the city center would only incur
losses of market share, thus both competitors would stay put with an
equal share of the market. But the positioning of the pharmacies no
longer would be efficient from the citizens point of view.

In order to try it out yourself, we invite to become the owner of "red"
pharmacy and compete with the "blue" one. You may choose to occupy any
cell in our one dimensional city and then the "blue" competitor will
retaliate. Note that cells served by the pharmacies have pale
backgrounds of the appropriate color. Retaliation of the "blue"
competitor is lagged by one second, therefore you should wait a bit
before clicking again.

[html5-interactive
src="/uploads/models/hotelling-law/index.html"
width="440" height="80" mode="iframe"]

The same ideas applies not only to geographical positions of stores.
Same things may be observed in cell phone design and functionality. Most
manufacturers produce phones which look much alike as well as provide
the same functions, which might not be needed by certain users. Some
people don't need GPS, camera (for taking photos) or earphones (for
listening to the music), but they will still have to buy phone with
these function anyway. Same applies to software (how many clones of
Angry birds or Flappy bird have you seen?). Even political debates are
the same - no matter the "morals", politicians tend to approach
"centristic" political views during debates to appear to be the better
option for the most voters.

A great explanation of the Hotelling law is given in the following
[youtube video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cFt0k6n_HKc). It
discusses both basic premise of Hotelling law and also generalizes it to
the political debates.

[youtube v="cFt0k6n_HKc"]
