Title: Market price - is it economic or sociological concept?
Date: 2014-07-28 08:37
Author: Vygintas Gontis
Tags: agent-based models, economics, stochastic models, voter model, Kirman model, V. Gontis, financial markets, market price, sociology, statistical physics
Slug: market-price-is-it-economic-or-sociological-concept
Status: published

This text follows up our recent article
"Consentaneous Agent-Based and Stochastic Model of the Financial
Markets" published in open access interdisciplinary journal PLoS ONE
[cite id="Gontis2014PlosOne"]. This article is a result of the ongoing
research at the [Institute of Theoretical Physics and
Astronomy](https://www.ff.vu.lt/tfai) of [Vilnius
University](https://www.vu.lt) implementing the ideas of econophysics.
Though our research is mostly related to the modeling of return
statistics in financial markets implementing ideas from statistical
physics, the concepts behind this work and conclusions are related to
the much more extensive interdisciplinary understanding of the social
and physical sciences. The desire to extend conventional boundaries and
achieve more understanding between researchers of physical and social
sciences is a strong motivation for us to deal with
econophysics.<!--more-->

The price is a key concept in economics as it enables general
quantitative description in economy and theoretical economics. Market
price plays a central role as it is assumed to precisely reflect the
real exchange values. Therefore a belief that market price is the most
objective one lies in the background of mainstream economics, based on
the rational expectation and efficient market concepts. These concepts
lie in the background of huge financial industry (stock exchange, other
securities, derivatives, currency exchange, etc.), making a vast impact
on the overall health of the global economy. However, periodically
emerging local and global economic crises give rise to the alternative
views opposing mainstream concepts of economics.

Econophysics much more often than econometrics criticizes mainstream
theory of economics. The observed fluctuations of the market price are
larger than it should be according to the equilibrium view of the
efficient market theory. Alternative views arise even in circles of the
economists as behavioral finance and economics receive much more
attention. Nobel Prize winner of 2013 professor of Yale University
Robert Shiller is an outstanding representative of the behavioral
alternative. The decision to award a Nobel price of economics to the
most outstanding advocate of efficient market theory prof. E.F. Fama and
representative of the alternative view serves as a proof that economics
with its concepts is in the crossroad. From our point of view behavioral
finance criticism towards econometrics and mathematical finance serves
as an obstacle to positively evaluate contribution of econophysics.
Nevertheless, the understanding that unstable financial and economic
processes have to be considered on the bases of statistical physics is
taking place [cite id="Castellano2009RevModPhys"].

From the point of view of representatives of behavioral economics and
finance the behavior of agents acting in the market is much more like
the behavior of realistic personalities with inherent intellectual and
psychological bugs than like the behavior of extraordinarily capable
individuals with ability to evaluate and account for all of the
surrounding circumstances and information. For example, they pay much
more attention to the tendency of imitation than to the individual
capabilities of agents to make independent decisions. In our work we aim
to demonstrate that it is possible to build a consentaneous model of
financial markets, where choice of agents between three different
trading strategies is based only on the transition probabilities between
these choices. From the mathematical point of view these transition
probabilities between two of the choices are the same as proposed by
Alan Kirman to describe the herding interactions of agents [cite
id="Kirman1993QJE"]. This way we propose an adaption of the herding
model to the financial markets, which can be solved by using method from
statistical physics to shape macroscopic description of financial
markets by the set of two stochastic differential equations. The main
objective of this model is to reproduce general statistical properties
of price movements observed in the real stock exchanges from Vilnius to
New York.

The detailed simulation of market return statistics, reproducing power
law probability density functions, power spectral densities and
autocorrelations of absolute return as well as reproducing very details
of these statistics, shows that herding of market participants is the
most general property dominating their very heterogeneous and less
meaningful rationality. We think that rationality is so heterogeneous
and so ambiguous, that in the final macroscopic view of the whole agent
society only the most general statistically meaningful property -
herding - is observed. Rationality as very diverse can be neglected in a
same way that physicists neglect trajectories of separate particles in
thermodynamic consideration.

Our proposed structure of agent groups is based on a conventional choice
considering three opportunities [cite id="Lux2009NaturePhys"]: 1)
intrinsic (fundamental) value oriented market traders - fundamentalists,
which buy stocks, when market price is lower than fundamental value and
sell when market price is higher than fundamental value; 2) speculative
traders, who forecast price movement and believe that market price will
go up - optimists and 3) speculative traders, who believe that market
price will go down, pessimists. Permanent dynamical change of traders’
choices impacts the demand and supply ratio and so forms a long term
dynamics of market price. In order to make such agent population
dynamics comparable with real financial markets we had to combine it
with permanent exogenous impact - external information flow or order
flow noise. These are all necessary assumptions to reproduce main
general properties of market price dynamics, observed for all markets
and all stocks. Though the model proposed has few independent
parameters, the same choice of parameter values is appropriate for all
markets and all stocks is the main it‘s advantage.

Proposed model provides evidence that price dynamics can be reproduced
by the memory-less Markov transitions of traders between possible
choices of behavior. From our point of view the proposed model suggests
new interpretation of market price, which may exhibit very large
deviations from fundamental value. In this new interpretation market
price highlights herding based drifts of agent-based societies,
neglecting intrinsic (fundamental) understanding of value and
surrendering to the imitational waves of collective wandering. Such
wandering can be supported by the public tales about unexpected economic
opportunities, emerging in the context of new financial, technological,
social and political tendencies. As the proposed model is based on the
agent opinion dynamics, we ask a question - whether the market price is
economic or sociological category? Answering the question we would
prefer to assume that fundamental value is more likely to be economic
concept and market price is more likely to be sociological concept. To
make practical distinction between different market price constituents
might be a hard task, nevertheless, the new market price interpretation
can be helpful looking for the opportunities to diminish observed huge
market price movements, responsible for the local or global economic
crises.

From our point of view, the herding as a statistically dominating
behavioral property of agents can be used for the stabilization of
undesirable market price fluctuations. It appears that only a small
number of agents trading exceptionally based only on fundamental values
is required to make a considerable influence on other market
participants leading to the much more stable movement of the market
price [cite id="Kononovicius2014PhysA"]. Certainly, it is obvious that
for the implementation of such mechanism a new and more comprehensive
understanding of fundamental price is needed. It should help to define a
new reference point in economics instead of the currently used market
price.
