Title: Not that good at physics? Your business might be at risk...
Date: 2014-03-10 07:46
Authors: Marija Rudzevičiūtė, Aleksejus Kononovicius
Tags: Agent-based models, Economics, A. Kononovicius, Bzn start, traffic, financial markets, statistical physics
Slug: not-that-good-at-physics-your-business-might-be-at-risk
Status: published

Physics of Risk is becoming more and more
popular and gaining more attention from the media. This time our
permanent contributor Aleksejus Kononovicius gave an interview to a
journalist Marija Rudzevičiūtė from [Bzn start](https://www.bznstart.lt).
The original article was published [in Lithuanian
language](https://www.bznstart.lt/verslas/verslo-salygos/1574/Neismanote-fizikos-Kyla-rizika-imonei "Lithuanian text on bznstart.lt"),
but here you can find its free form translation to English.

"Probably most of us were stuck in a traffic jam for at least once in
our life. Some of us were certainly stuck in a traffic jam, though there
were no car crash, no road works or no other apparent reason for the
road to be jammed. Yet all cars move in a jerky motion - they suddenly
accelerate, move a bit and then suddenly stop. The reason lies in a
small errors made by the drivers themselves", everyday situation in a
large city is reviewed by Aleksejus Kononovicius, younger research
fellow at Institute of Theoretical Physics and Astronomy, Vilnius
University. He is also a current contributor to the "Physics of Risk", a
website which presents an idea that "more physics - less risk" for a
broader society.<!--more-->

Small disturbances - large consequences
---------------------------------------

According to our interviewee, if road is packed with cars, then sudden
deceleration of one car may trigger "stopping" wave through all cars in
the road.  
"By taking these observations into account we can create agent-based
model, which would replicate general features of car traffic. The model
could be further applied while creating, testing and improving traffic
related projects - cross-roads and flyovers, self-driving cars and smart
traffic lights. These tools would be certainly used by governmental
institutions and architects, but the benefits would reaped by the
society", - young scientist suggests one way of improving our everyday
life by relying on physical thought.

"In the second half of the XX-th century physicists noted that all the
complex structures, such as a life and culture, emerged from a simple
initial conditions, few elementary particles, during the Big Bang. It
was somewhat peculiar that no one has thought of that before and that no
one asked a very natural question - how can complexity emerge from
simple conditions? Some of the physical systems as well as biological,
social and economic are far from equilibrium", - replied A. Kononovicius
when asked about the relationship between physics and every day life.
Though he also noted that every system is unique and one should not
neglect it.

More physics - less risk
------------------------

"It is our motto", - explains the young researcher. - "It is a nice play
with words, which reflects actual scientific research. The better the
understanding of phenomenon, the easier it is to estimate and control
the related risk. This is especially important in the context of social
and economic systems. But this problem concerns not only physicists,
many excellent works were also published by mathematicians, economists
and sociologists", - the relation between physics and risk is unveiled
by the interviewee.

Asked if this motto could applied in business A. Kononovicius swiftly
replies: "Business, as well as society, would gain a lot from the
optimization of logistic problems. One of the success stories in
business world is related to the American "Southwest Airlines". This
company was one of the first to use agent-based model to optimize its
cargo delivery policies. Agent-based model suggest counter-intuitive
strategy - to decrease not the distance traveled, but number of flights.
This strategy helped save millions dollars, which would be otherwise
spent on cargo handling."

Biggest risk in the financial markets
-------------------------------------

According to the interviewee financial markets is the business sector
related to the biggest risk. "Here we have to face lots of traders
optimizing their risk and expected returns every day. Currently, as far
as I know, they use phenomenological models, which are either derived
from the past data or are fitted to it. The essential drawback of such
models is that they are able to reproduce only what is included in the
data - they are able to grasp only the most direct relationships between
the observables. Agent-based models, on the other hand, may grasp the
hidden relationships and thus replicate the full complexity of the
phenomenon, both one that exists in the data and the one that may
emerge", - A. Kononovicius develops his thought on the financial
markets.

According to him, agent-based models might grasp the hidden feedback
loops, which exist in the actual systems. The inclusion of feedback
loops into the models may help to understand the impact of our present
actions on the future of the market. This understanding might provide a
way to make smarter decisions, which would also anticipate the future
developments in the market. This should work very well on the short time
scales.

"Currently there are numerous commercial proprietary software packages,
which allow anyone to model business processes on almost any computer",
- A. Kononovicius comments on the current situation and the possibility
to do the simulation at home or at the office.
