Title: Scale-free behavior as a result of "luck and reason"
Date: 2014-05-12 08:12
Author: Aleksejus Kononovicius
Tags: Interactive models, Network models, Barabasi-Albert model, scale free network
Slug: scale-free-behavior-as-a-result-of-luck-and-reason
Status: published
Image_url: uploads/2014/scale-free-behavior-as-a-result-of-luck-and-reason.png

Previously we have already
discussed how
[scale-free](/tag/scale-free-network/)
network could form in social systems. We have used the fact that people
tend to meet new people through their friends, thus [edge redirection
models]({filename}/articles/2013/edge-redirection-network-formation-models.md)
are perfect example of a simple social network formation model. But
scale-free networks are observed in very diverse systems, thus it is
highly probable that many different mechanisms for scale-free network
generation may exist \[cite id="Albert2002RevModPhys,
Barabasi2015CUP"\]. In this text we will discuss how intrinsic random
nature and tendency to optimize causes scale-free topologies to emerge
in computer networks - how and why "luck and reason" may be behind the
observed complexity \[cite id="Barabasi2015CUP"\].<!--more-->

When adding a new node (e.g., router) to the network we have to take to
important factors into consideration - the cost of cable necessary to
connect to certain node, \\\(  \delta r\_{ij} \\\) (here \\\( \delta \\\) is "cable" price per length unit and \\\(  r\_{ij} \\\) is the
distance between the nodes), and the "fitness" of that node, \\\( h\_j \\\). The most evident measure of fitness in case of computer networks
is the network distance from the central node (the one which connects to
other networks). The smaller the network distance is the better it is,
because smaller network distance means less unnecessary load on the
other parts of the network. Less load on the network means that we can
use cheaper routers.

To keep thins simple we will place central node in the center of our
figures, but it also may be placed randomly. Next we add network nodes
one by one and place them randomly. After the placement of the node one
edge is added. The edge will connect one new node to one old node. The
old node, \\\(  j \\\), is selected by minimizing cost:  

\begin{equation}
 C\_i = \min\nolimits\_j \left\\\{ \delta r\_{ij} + h\_j \right\\\} .
\end{equation}

In this text we will determine presence of the scale-free topology
indirectly - through the probability density function of node degrees
(it should at least have a power law tail) and also we will verify if
preferential attachment is present in the network evolution. Estimation
of the probability density function should be trivial, but the second
method is more interesting. The importance of preferential attachment in
the real-life growing networks can be determined by examining the rate
at which nodes with distinct degrees gain new edges (increase their
degree). Namely one should take network snapshots at two distinct time
moments, \\\(  \Delta t=t-t' \\\), and determine the change in degree,
\\\(  \Delta d\_i \\\), for each and every node. Now the average rate
can be easily determined:  

\begin{equation}
 \Pi(d) = \left\langle \frac{\Delta d\_i}{\Delta t}\right\rangle\_{d\_i(t')=d} . 
\end{equation}

In this model \\\(  \Pi(d) \\\) is a very useful indicator, which helps
to single out three different network topologies generated by the model.
If \\\(  \delta \\\) is small (in our applet \\\(  \delta \leq 1 \\\)),
then network topology is hub and spoke (\\\(  \Pi(d) \\\) usually has
only one non-zero value). If the cable is cheap, then evidently all new
nodes connect directly to the central node.

![Fig.  1: Small δ (δ=1). Network topology is hub and spoke - most edges are
gained by central node.]({static}/uploads/2014/router-d-1.jpg "Small δ
(δ=1). Network topology is hub and spoke - most edges are gained by central
node."){#attachment_2659} 

On the other hand if cable is very pricey, \\\(  \delta \\\) is huge (in
our applet \\\(  \delta \gg 10 \\\)), then evidently all new nodes will
pick only their nearest neighbor. As the new node placement is
completely random, the neighbor selection also becomes random and thus
our \\\(  \Pi(d) \\\) becomes flat.

![Fig.  2: Large δ (δ=10000). Geometric distance becomes the most important
factor in edge formation.]({static}/uploads/2014/router-d-10000.jpg "Large
δ (δ=10000). Geometric distance becomes the most important factor in edge
formation."){#attachment_2658} 

The most interesting case is obtained with intermediate prices of the
cable. Namely when the influence of \\\(  \delta \\\) and \\\(  h\_j \\\)
become comparable (in our applet \\\(  \delta \approx 5 \\\)). In this
case both geometric and network distances are almost equally important.
In this case \\\(  Pi \\\) grows linearly with \\\(  d \\\) suggesting
that preferential attachment is present in the network formation. The
probability density function of node degree's is power law thus we can
draw comparisons with [Barabasi-Albert
model]({filename}/articles/2013/barabasi-albert-model.md)
and think of the router network as scale-free network.

![Fig.  3: Intermediate value of δ (δ=5). Geometric and network distances
are equally
important.]({static}/uploads/2014/scale-free-behavior-as-a-result-of-luck-and-reason.jpg
"Intermediate value of δ (δ=5). Geometric and network distances are equally
important."){#attachment_2661} 

We invite readers to test this model using HTML5 applet below.

[html5-interactive
src="/uploads/models/network-models/router-network.html"
width="500" height="310" mode="iframe"]

We would like to note that during the initial steps it rather
problematic to determine \\\(  \Pi(d) \\\) precisely. Thus during the
initial 500 steps the applet will show only approximate relationships
(in the figures they will be plotted using blue dots). After the initial
steps precise estimation becomes possible and the color of dots will be
switched to red.
