Title: V. Gontis: The triumph of Penn effect in Europe
Date: 2014-02-10 06:58
Author: Vygintas Gontis
Tags: Economics, Interactive models, Big Mac Index, Eurostat, World Bank, StatPlanet, The Economist, V. Gontis, gross domestic product, economic convergence, macroeconomics, purchasing power parity, purchasing power standard, politics
Slug: v-gontis-triumph-penn-effect-europe
Status: published

The idea of this contribution has come after
the publication in *The Economist* [The Big Mac
index](http://www.economist.com/content/big-mac-index). Such index was
introduce to explain the concept of real currency exchange rate needed
to deal with the problem of varying price levels in different countries.
The different price levels cause the different purchasing powers of the
same currency around the world. For example, the network of fast food
restaurants around the world McDonald’s serves everywhere the same
products, consider one of them - Big Mac. Having in mind the same
quality of the product we do observe different prices of Big Mac around
the world and so have to accept the varying prices or purchasing powers
of the same currency, say USD. It was thought from the beginning that
such effect must be temporal and exchange rates have to converge towards
equilibrium where Big Mac prices equalize. Unfortunately, this do not
happen, the different price levels around the world is very stable
phenomena and statistically prices are higher in countries with higher
incomes. This statistical phenomenon was called Penn effect and
economists Balassa and Samuelson in 1964 independently explained it as a
result of different productivities in tradable and not tradable sectors
of the economy. The research in contemporary international
macroeconomics forces us to acknowledge that this phenomenon is much
more general and Balassa Samuelson effect is only one of all possible
explanations.<!--more-->

This should be obvious that the problem of economic convergence we are
interested might have roots in Penn effect. If price levels and
productivities had a tendency to equalize around the world, it should be
possible to assume that the statistical leverage of prices is a similar
process as leverage of temperatures in thermodynamics. Unfortunately,
such convergence is still disputable and can be observed only as
conditional process. We as Europeans need an answer to the question: is
the geopolitical and macro economical EU experiment favorable for the
economic convergence of EU members? Or sceptics are right? The countries
will tend to the economic differentiation and disintegration and such
union is not stable. We just look for the quantitative estimation of
real processes in Europe comparing it to the rest of the world. To
achieve a more solid statistical background we have to switch from the
popular Big Mac index to the well-established method of purchasing power
parities (PPP), giving us an evaluation of price levels aggregate GDP.

Here we present interactive graphs based on the [World
Bank](http://www.worldbank.org/) and
[Eurostat](http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/eurostat/home/)
data. The PPP method gives us the countries price level aggregate GDP
and the GDP evaluated in purchasing power standards (PPS), accounting
different price levels and different purchasing powers. The most visual
method to present this data and to exhibit the strength of Penn effect
is a GDP and price level scatter plot of countries. It is very helpful
to use [StatTrend](http://www.statsilk.com/software/stattrends) software
just developed for such task. The interactive interface of such
visualization gives us an insight into world development and specific
fluctuations during the crises. We present the data in the time interval
from 1995 to 2012 including the periods of EU extension and last global
crises.

The statistical data can be viewed combining six variables: PriceLevel,
GDPpercapitaUSD, GDPpercapitaPPP\_USD, LogPriceLevel,
LogGDPpercapitaUSD, LogGDPpercapitaPPP\_USD. Notations of variables are
self-explaining; GDP is presented accounting PPP and jus in current USD
for comparison. We introduce Log scale as more appropriate for the
exponential processes such as economic growth. For more detailed
reference to data source take a look at information given in the
Appendix. There is a possibility to view data as time series or column
charts, just click on the appropriate pictogram. Very impressive is the
scatter plot time animation with possibility to view economic growth
trajectories of individual countries. In the right panel there is a list
of countries distributed into six continental regions: Former Soviet
Republics, Asia & Australia, Europe, Latin & North America, Middle East
& North Africa, and Africa. Every region has his own color and you can
determine it easily holding mouse over countries bubble. Let’s view the
data, experiment yourself clicking on the [Fig.
1](#attachment_2624), and then
you can get acquainted with our observations.

![Fig.
1: Penn effect. Scatter plot of World countries in the plane
(LOGGDPpercapitaPPP\_USD,
LOGPriceLevel).](/uploads/2014/02/penn-effect-world-en.jpg "
Penn effect. Scatter plot of World countries in the plane
(LOGGDPpercapitaPPP\_USD, LOGPriceLevel)."){#attachment_2624}

Looking at the world scatter plot for the pair of variables (LogGDPper
capitaPPP\_USD, LogPriceLevel) one can observe rather weak exhibition of
Penn effect: countries are scattered in wide area around some trend
line, which has a low coefficient of slope up, 0.15. There is very weak
dependence of this view on the year considered. For the major part of
regions the view is very similar as for the whole world: for the Former
Soviet countries (except Baltic countries) slope is 0.13, for Asia
slightly higher 0.22, Latin and North America exhibits slope 0.19, slope
coefficient drops to the value 0.05 for the Middle East & North Africa
and to the value 0.08 for the Africa. Only in Europe we can observe
clear manifestation of Penn effect with very narrow scattering of
countries around the steep trend, 0.69. The strong phenomenon for Europe
is observed in the whole period of consideration and probably the data
of economic development for European countries is the most suitable to
check theories of international macroeconomics seeking to explain Penn
effect.

![Fig.
2: Penn effect. Scatter plot of Europian countries in the plane
(LOGGDPpercapitaPPS,
LOGPriceLevel).](/uploads/2014/02/penn-effect-europe-en.jpg "
Penn effect. Scatter plot of Europian countries in the plane
(LOGGDPpercapitaPPS, LOGPriceLevel)."){#attachment_2625}

We do have intention to analyze Eurostat data based on the PPP to get in
more details of Penn effect manifestation in Europe. The method of
visualization is really the same as in the previous consideration of
World Bank data. Countries of Europe can be distributed into some
regional groups as well; nevertheless, these groups are too small to
determine specific trends of their scatter plots. Let us to exclude
Luxemburg (center of international finance with very specific GDP
structure), Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as Macedonia (very new
countries in economic area of Europe) and Albania (the most closed
economy) from the consideration. In such set of countries we do consider
interrelated economic region with countries having various sizes and
levels of income. Then we can expect the best determination of common
trend in scatter plot and more reasonable evaluation of economic
convergence in the region.

We slightly changed the list of variables and left only one GDP estimate
in purchasing power standards (PPS). Then we add ratio GDP2012/GDP1995
as estimate of countries GDP growth in the period considered. The
general result for European countries is really impressive: all
countries appear in the very vicinity of the joint trend line witnessing
the strong evidence of Penn effect for countries with strong economic
interaction. The slope of trend line is 0.93 for the year 2012 and
fluctuates from 0.77 to 1.0 in the whole period. In other words, the
statistical effect just have become like a law: the relative difference
in GDP between two countries is possible only in the case when relative
difference in aggregate prices is of the same magnitude. Note that
countries above the trend line likely have more problems in economic
development than countries below, for example, Greece in the last period
and Iceland in 2007 have too high price levels in comparison with GDP
followed by real economic balance and development problems. It looks
like the optimal development is achieved when countries GDP is in
balance with price level, namely, countries should keep their
trajectories of development very close to the joint trend of their
scatter plot. Certainly, such ideas have to be considered and proved in
much more detailed studies. Now we just consider it as an idea how to
optimize development of community such as EU. We are pleased to notice
that Lithuania has some space to increase local prices and non-tradable
sector in order to lever countries GDP.

We do care most of economic convergence in European region, whether it
takes place, how rapid such process is, and which countries are most
successful. One can observe an evidence of economic convergence looking
at the growth trajectories of European countries. The most impressive
view can be generated through animated scatter plot in log-log scale or
alternatively one can analyze rations GDP2012/GDP1995 using column
chart. The Baltic countries are leaders in economic growth among
European countries, as their GDP per capita in PPS grew up 3.5 times in
the considered period. Other countries of Central and Eastern Europe
grew up more than old members of EU and so contributed to the common
economic convergence.

The methodology to analyze economic growth on the bases of Penn effect
introduces a new dimension of international macroeconomics, which is
rarely considered as the main force of developing countries. The more
deep insight into phenomenon might help to achieve better understanding
of the role of economic integration seeking for the sustainable regional
and world development. The geopolitical experiment of European
integration just has to become an object of extensive macroeconomic
studies. Unfortunately, there is a lack of information and understanding
about real benefits to the developing countries to be integrated into
such economic area as EU. A general public opinion is that the main
source of economic convergence is the structural support implemented by
EU. From our point of view the differences of price levels impact much
higher capital and financial flows generating the observed rates of
economic convergence. Any endeavor to eliminate restrictions for capital
and financial flows in joint economic area contribute to the economic
convergence as to the manifestation of Penn effect.

The experiences of economic development in Baltic countries deserve much
higher attention. Arguments and explanation why and how Baltic countries
succeed caching up Vysegrad group would contribute the theory and
practice of international macroeconomics. The trends of development in
Slovakia and Czech Republic would bring new understanding of economic
convergence as differences in economic development being one of the
reasons for disintegration before EU reversed into the new stage of
economic convergence in the period of EU integration.

Interactive applet
------------------

[Click here](/uploads/models/penn-world-en/index.html) for interactive applet.

Appendix
--------

The [World Bank](http://data.worldbank.org/) data can be retrieved using
following information:

-   GDPper capitaUSD - World Development Indicators, GDP per capita
    (current US$) -
    [NY.GDP.PCAP.CD](http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD)
-   GDPpercapitaPPP\_USD - World Development Indicators, GDP per capita,
    PPP (current international $) -
    [NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD](http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD)
-   PriceLevel - World Development Indicators, PPP conversion factor
    (GDP) to market exchange rate ratio -
    [PA.NUS.PPPC.RF](http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/PA.NUS.PPPC.RF)

The
[Eurostat](http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/eurostat/home/)
data is available as indicators:

-   GDPpercapitaPPS - GDP and main components - Gross domestic product
    at market prices \[nama\_gdp\_c\], Purchasing Power Standard per
    inhabitant.
-   PriceLevel - Price level indices (EU28=100), AGGREG95 Gross Domestic
    Product.

