Title: V. Gontis: the World Faces an Explosion of Financial Bubble Unprepared Again
Date: 2015-08-23 23:40
Author: Vygintas Gontis
Tags: Economics, China, V. Gontis, gross domestic product, financial markets, macroeconomics, politics
Slug: v-gontis-world-faces-an-explosion-of-financial-bubble-unprepared-again
Status: published

The evolution of
financial markets will impact on everyone's life, as all areas of our
activities are somehow related with finance and economy. The precise
prediction of following events in the coming few months is hardly
possible, so our attention has to be on the watch of news flow from the
world's financial sectors and our actions has to be as possible timely.
What is going on?

Though the attention of world's media during the summer period was
primarily devoted to the Greece, potentially the most globally important
financial and economic processes originate in China and outspread very
far away. China already in 2008 reacting on the global financial crises
was one of the first countries, which implemented very wide 586 billion
US dollars programme of financial stimulation for the development of the
country's infrastructure. Though from the outside view Chines have
succeeded to overcome global crises and the growth of GDP was the most
rapid in the world, the whole mechanism of financial stimulation
experienced serious imperfections exaggerating investment projects with
insufficient economic reasoning, overvalued development of housing and
building new economic disproportions inside the country. The general
estimation of the stimulation program indicates that this contributed to
the growth of China after 2008 exceeds up to the 90 percent of whole GDP
growth (see [article by Bill Powel on
Time](http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1975336,00.html#ixzz1g4B5P26P)).
Nevertheless, several giant projects have really failed.<!--more-->

The Chinese municipal governments have developed the independent
infrastructure programs with total value of used credits up to the 1.7
trillions of US dollars (see [Telegraph's article on China subprime
credit
bubble](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/china-business/8770945/China-faces-subprime-credit-bubble-crisis.html)),
the one third of these loans are estimated as bad one. This results that
considerable part of municipalities could be considered as a local
"Greece-like" problems of China. So extensive use of credits was
followed by increased inflation and overvaluation of real estate.
Contrary to the many other countries, where prices of real estate after
2008 experienced correction, the bubble in China was blowing up further
(see [NY Times article on China's housing
bubble](http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2011/04/14/chinas-scary-housing-bubble?ref=asia)).
As in the case of other financial bubbles the China experiences
increased demand of luxury products, in general estimates the market of
luxury products here is larger than in US and Europe together (see
[Businessinsider.com article on luxury demand in
China](http://www.businessinsider.com/luxury-demand-china-2011-10)).

These obvious features of financial and economic bubbles in China have
to be considered very seriously by other countries, where, including US,
bubbles of financial markets are prepared for explosion as many stock
indexes are above their historical records. China plays an exceptional
economic role as the world's factory impacting considerably on the world
prices of commodities and on general demand of products produced in
other countries. The response of US and other countries to present
problems in China manifested as widespread plunk down of stocks during
last three trading days of yesterweek.

Though the media is still looks pretty quiet and broadcasts opinions
considering the financial information as ordinary correction of markets,
our duty is to warn that, probably, there are the first sounds of global
bubble explosion and we have to be ready for the worst (see [Telepgrah's
article on possible global market
crash](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/11805523/Doomsday-clock-for-global-market-crash-strikes-one-minute-to-midnight-as-central-banks-lose-control.html)).
One can find more opinions of financial analysts looking at the various
web sources of financial information.

More and more compelling facts and economic data about slowing down
economy of China are replacing continuing general talks about state of
economy in this country. The bubble of stocks is already exploding from
the beginning of June and the Shanghai Composite Index lost per 30
percent of its maximum value, there is announcement about decrease of
China's exports in July up to the 9 percent in comparison with the same
month of year before. Wide announcement in the beginning of yesterweek
regarding devaluation of yuan has triggered fluctuations of other
currencies as many countries of developing world do not have other
alternatives to the devaluation of their currencies as well. This has
impacted the markets of the largest word economy in US, where main stock
indexes have fallen down about 6 percents during last three trading days
and the dollar experienced devaluation in comparison with euro more than
3 percents. Such US response just witnessed very strong dependence on
Chinese economic health. The sense of exceptional role of Chinese
economy on the world was strengthened by continuing decrease of prices
in commodity market and the price of crude oil, which has fallen below
the level of 40 dollars.

All these huge global financial fluctuations leave us with very little
hope that economic storm will pass. Instead, the understanding that
financial markets are prone to become very unstable as a result of
statistically prevailing herding nature in the interactions of asset
traders \[cite id="Gontis2014PlosOne,Gontis2016PhysA"\], supports our
confidence that financial markets will continue the collapse and the
consequences of this are really impossible to predict with available
theories of economics and finance.

We just want to draw more attention to the present evolution of global
financial markets, to avoid too late response to the processes making
very big impact on the all aspects of our life.
