Title: V. Gontis, A. Kononovicius, K. Acus: Baltic countries should continue EU leadership in the sustained economic growth
Date: 2013-09-16 07:20
Authors: Vygintas Gontis, Aleksejus Kononovicius, KÄ™stutis Acus
Tags: Economics, A. Kononovicius, Eurostat, K. Acus, StatPlanet, V. Gontis, gross domestic product, economic convergence, macroeconomics, purchasing power parity, purchasing power standard, politics, actual individual consumption
Slug: baltic-countries-should-continue-eu-leadership-in-the-sustained-economic-growth
Status: published

In the
previous
[text](/baltijos-valstybiu-ekonomikos-vejasi-ir-lenkia-vysegrado-salis/)
we considered statistical information from various sources, exhibiting
sustained economic growth of Baltic countries. Now with some confidence
we can conclude that even world financial crises has made only
short-term impact on the stable growth trend. The Baltic States once
again are taking economic growth leadership in EU and will seek to
sustain these positions in the nearest future.

The particular role of exports in the recovered economic growth confirms
presumptions regarding exceptional manifestation of [Balassa-Samuelson
effect](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balassa%E2%80%93Samuelson_effect "Read about Balassa-Samuelson effect on Wikipedia")
in Baltics. Nevertheless, one needs more arguments, why this effect
contributes more in the development of Baltic region then others. For
example, the Visegrad countries, having a similar level of gross
domestic product (GDP), should have the same development rate. In this
contribution we would like to draw your attention at the statistics of
gross earnings, leaving details of macroeconomic modeling aside, as
labor earning is a key parameter in all models.  
<!--more-->

Seeking to improve presentation of statistical data, we use the
graphical software package
[StatPlanet](http://www.statsilk.com/software/statplanet) built for the
data mapping and visualization. Our analyses of labor earnings in
connection with GDP growth is based on [Eurostat
data](http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/eurostat/home).
We choose the time interval from 1995 to 2012 as long as available data
from Eurostat for the Baltic countries given in purchasing power
standards (PPS). These countries and their convergence to the EU
economic area is our main interest in this analysis. We use two data
sets: GDP in market prices and labor gross earnings given in PPS. Other
presented variables are simple functions of these two basic sets.

[Interactive program
StatPlanet](/uploads/models/statplanet-gdp/index.html)
plots three time series (t.s.) in the year interval from 1995 to 2012:

1.  GDP per capita in PPS,
2.  Relative GDP growth, GDP(year)/GDP(1995),
3.  Ratio Gross earning/GDP current year.

And two averages of time series in the considered time intervals:

1.  Average growth rate per year,
    `POWER(10;LOG(BVP(2012)/BVP(1995))/17)-1)*100`, %,
2.  Average of ratio gross earning/GDP.

[external-interactive
url="/uploads/models/statplanet-gdp/index.html"
imgurl="/uploads/models/statplanet-gdp/index.jpg"
mode="img"]

One can interactively choose plot parameters exhibited by [the FLASH
applet](/uploads/models/statplanet-gdp/index.html) and analyze
three time series and two their averages for the all EU countries and
few main EU partner countries. We do aim to discuss in more details
economic growth of Baltic in comparison with other countries. We would
like to draw your attention ones again that the relative economic growth
(t.s. 2) of all Baltic countries practically coincide and considerably
overcome all other countries exhibited. Note that relative economic
growth of Baltic countries is higher during all period in comparison
with more developed and less developed countries and the trend is
sustained even after the hard impact of world financial crises. See
[Fig. 1](#attachment_2541) giving an interactive plot screen short of
relative GDP growth. From our point of view the negative impact of
financial crisis has been conditioned by the collapse of credit flow
more than by seeming endogenous macroeconomic disproportions in Baltics.

![Fig.
1. Relative GDP growth of EU contries in the period 1995-2012, map of
GDP(2011)/GDP(1995).](/uploads/2013/09/relative-gdp-growth.jpg "
Relative GDP growth of EU contries in the period 1995-2012, map
of GDP(2011)/GDP(1995)."){#attachment_2541} 

Having in mind that labor cost is indispensable part of macroeconomic
growth models, we do propose to take attention at the time series of
gross earning and GDP per capita ratio, t.s. 3. These time series do not
coincident as well as relative growth series do for Baltic countries.
Nevertheless, it is obvious that series of Latvia and Estonia coincide
pretty well. Baltic countries do not have particular values of gross
earnings: there are more countries with similar level of labor costs. It
is worth to note that the ratio of gross earning and GDP for Baltic
countries is stable in the period considered and do not overcome the
value 0.9. Only Latvia was approaching this level just before crises
started. Lithuania during all period has slightly lower level of gross
earning. We can argue that Lithuania has some space for more active
local market and higher labor costs.

The mapping of gross earning and relative GDP growth in Europe reveals
negative correlation of these two variables, see [Fig.
2](#attachment_2542) and [Fig. 3](#attachment_2543), exhibiting average
growth rate and average gross earning respectively. This correlation
seems even stronger for the more developed countries than for developing
one. For example, Ireland, Luxemburg and Norway have higher relative
growth rates and lower relative gross earnings.

![Fig.
2. Map of average GDP growth per year of EU countries in the period
1995-2012.](/uploads/2013/09/eu-gdp-growth.jpg "
Map of average GDP growth per year of EU countries in the period
1995-2012."){#attachment_2542} 

![Fig.
3. Map of average relative gross earning in EU contries,
1995-2012.](/uploads/2013/09/mean-relative-wage.jpg "
Map of average relative gross earning in EU contries,
1995-2012."){#attachment_2543} 

It is worth to switch from the averaged view to the more detailed time
series of various countries revealing possible problems of economic
growth related to the increasing levels of gross earnings. One can
observe from the data that economic growth of countries in South Europe:
Italy, Portugal and Spain, discontinues when gross earning approaches
GDP per capita. It is accepted in research literature that for countries
with similar level of development the [Balassa-Samuelson
effect](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balassa%E2%80%93Samuelson_effect "Read about Balassa-Samuelson effect on Wikipedia")
is already spent. Probably, too high levels of gross earnings for these
countries can be one more obstacle for the competitiveness of their
economies. It is too early to make certain conclusions regarding
financial austerity measures for South Europe, it is not clear whether
this will bring competitiveness and new economic growth. For example,
the collapse of economy in Greece is accompanied by some growth of
relative gross earning. Only in Portugal one can observe some decrease
in earning level, which, probably, will bring back competitiveness and
growth.

In comparison with other EU countries the level of labor costs in
Baltics remains low in all period considered and so secures
competitiveness of investment. We do hear arguments that currency board
or introduced Euro can become an obstacle for the developing countries
restricting monetary instruments to adjust appropriate level of labor
costs and increase competitiveness. Such kind fear was especially strong
in the beginning of financial crises. A Baltic country, each in her
particular way, has proved that there is wider choice of financial
austerity measures and appropriate macroeconomic environment together
with EU integration process can secure sustained economic growth. From
our point of view, the economic growth based on exports of countries in
the environment of international economic depression and experiencing
stable decrease in domestic credit level gives us a message that these
countries still have unused resources for further economic development.
Statistical data reveals that Lithuania has additional opportunities for
the development of local market, as the impact of financial crises is
too much reduced level of local labor earnings.

The more detailed economic growth analyses of Baltic countries should
have value in the general context of EU development. Slovakia exhibits
rapid development as well, there is good opportunity to make comparisons
with slower development of Czech Republic. The exceptional interest has
to be given to study economic development of Turkey, as this economy
potentially can impact further development of EU. The sustained economic
development of all these and other Central and Eastern European
countries has to be considered as good applications of New International
Macroeconomics. Unfortunately, there is obvious lack of attention for
such research in Lithuania.
