Title: V. Gontis, K. Acus: Economies of Baltic countries are catching up and overcoming Visegrad Group
Date: 2013-07-22 07:40
Authors: Vygintas Gontis, Kęstutis Acus
Tags: Economics, Baltic countries, Eurostat, K. Acus, V. Gontis, gross domestic product, economic convergence, macroeconomics, purchasing power parity, purchasing power standard, politics, actual individual consumption
Slug: economies-baltic-countries-catching-overcoming-visegrad-group
Status: published

Following our previous papers about economic
convergence of Baltic and Visegrad countries and long-term development
forecasting, we want to review the latest [Eurostat
data](http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/purchasing_power_parities/data/database)
about Europe and OECD economies in purchasing power standards (PPS).
There are at least three reasons for that. First of all, we look for the
best way to compare GDPs between countries. Secondly, we seek
appropriate and the most reliable data to model international
macroeconomic convergence processes. Finally, we want to draw your
attention at the latest Eurostat data, which stresses extremely strong
growth of Baltic countries.

Economic development of the European Union member states is a live
international macroeconomic experiment. Theoretical analysis and
possible modeling of these processes is a real challenge to all analysts
and theorists. EU experience would be much more useful if the running
economic processes were understood from the macroeconomic theory point
of view. Noticed laws would be handful, solving issues of the EU economy
in the future. In our opinion, observed regularities follow especially
stable trends. The observed regularities of macroeconomic trends could
be useful to forecast long-term economic development in the manner of
natural sciences. This could be done in much larger extent, than, for
example, in the weather long term forecasting. In a previous article
["The phenomenon of economic growth of Baltic
countries"](/the-phenomenon-of-economic-growth-of-baltic-states)we
used World Bank data to point on a particular universality of economic
growth in different regions. There we partly revise the data by adding
Scandinavian countries to already reviewed Baltic and Visegrad regions.
In the first graph we plot GDPs in USD, current prices, of these EU
members’ and Norway from 1995 to 2012. The same data is show in three
different ways to stress various growth
trends.<!--more-->

![Fig.
1: GDP in USD, current prices, of Baltic, Visegrad and Scandinavian
countries is shown in three different ways from 1995 to
2012.](/uploads/2013/07/baltic-visegrad-scandinavia-gdp-usd-1995-2012-en.jpg "
GDP in USD, current prices, of Baltic, Visegrad and Scandinavian
countries is shown in three different ways from 1995 to
2012."){#attachment_2511} 

In graph (a), where GDP values are nominal, it is hard to distinguish
any different growth trends and group countries according to them. While
in logarithmic GDP growth plot, graph (b), it is possible to group
countries to developed and developing ones. This partly shows the
convergence of groups‘. This happens because an instantaneous economic
growth is exponential one, according to the assumptions of neoclassical
economics. Such growth can be shown in a logarithmic graph at its best.
Exponential processes, when a variable gain is proportional to its
instantaneous value, are common in many social events, while an economic
growth is one of them.

In the third graph, (c), GDPs are normalized to give 1 in 1995. In such
a way, 3 different GDP growth groups are revealed: Baltic, Visegrad and
Scandinavian. Only the Norway is out of the order like an exception to
prove the rule. Oil and gas production may be the additional home source
for Norway to keep high investment level, probably.

The fact, that countries economic growth can be grouped easily according
to its historic development, indicates that long-term development is
influenced more by international macroeconomic environment, than by
peculiarities of their internal economic policy. Existing exceptions
show cases, when principal internal mistakes do not allow taking the
advantages of favorable regional macroeconomic environment. Other
exceptions, probably, show the cases, when a rich of natural resources
country may outstrip other countries in a region. Only with the help of
international macroeconomics models it is possible to highlight
necessary conditions for economic convergence. The
Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson effect has the largest influence to the
development of international macroeconomic models dealing with the
problem of economic convergence

The GDP measurement in US dollars based on World Bank data for European
countries may seem a bit disputable. Euro as a currency and Eurostat as
a data source might be a good alternative as more relevant to the
European economic area. So, for further comparisons we used the same
economic growth graphs as before, just switched from World Bank to
Eurostat data.  
In the second figure GDP growth curves are shown in the same period,
just calculated in Euros with use of Eurostat data.

![Fig.
2: GDP in Euros, current prices, of Baltic, Visegrad and Scandinavian
countries is shown in three different ways form 1995 to 2012 (Eurostat
data).](/uploads/2013/07/baltic-visegrad-scandinavia-gdp-eur-1995-2012-en.jpg "
GDP in Euros, current prices, of Baltic, Visegrad and
Scandinavian countries is shown in three different ways form 1995 to
2012 (Eurostat data)."){#attachment_2512} 

As was expected, switching to Euro brings some changes to countries GDP
long-term trends, as a result of significant EUR/USD exchange rate
fluctuations during the period. But these do not change countries order
according the GDP per capita value in 2012. While the countries order
according the GDP per capita value in 1995 differs quite significantly,
if we compare World Bank and Eurostat data. The reason for this is the
correction of World Bank data performed for the Central and Eastern
Europe GDP series during the period of fast social and economic
transition until 1995-96. The correction was needed to link data from
different socioeconomic periods. Transitions of Central and Eastern
Europe countries, due to the social and political peculiarities, were
quite different. Because of that, the correction of GDP data in1995
differs for every country, this results in the different normalizing
values used in graphs (c). The largest corrections were made to Slovakia
- 29%, Lithuania - 19% and Latvia - 7%. This causes the significant
differences of graph (c) in Fig. 2 comparing to the corresponding graph
in Fig. 1. Relative GDP growth of Baltic countries based on Eurostat
data is not so well concurrent, as using World Bank data. The Slovakia
pretty well stands out with its larger growth from other Visegrad
countries, when the data correction in 1995 is not used. One can
conclude that long-term GDP growth trends using World Bank data are more
universal and in larger extent reflect regional macroeconomic changes.

Our main conclusion is that we can clearly point out three regions with
very different economic growth rates: growth rates of Baltic countries
were the highest during all 1995-2012 period, growth rates of Visegrad
countries were much lower than in Baltics, while growth rates of
developed Scandinavian countries matched EU average. It is very likely,
that such growth rates will remain at least in mid-term, let say 10
years, period. Although World Financial crisis seriously disturbed, but
does not change significantly long-term trends. At least for the Baltic
countries the World Financial crisis starts to run dry, and this brings
a return to the rapid economic convergence of Baltics with EU.

Till now, we were more interested in comparison of the economic growth
rates, than in accurate measurement of achieved GDP level. The question,
how to compare quantitative GDP levels of countries achieved, is also
very important and interesting. Comparison problem arises, because
nominal GDP consist of two components: average price level and GDP
volume (quantity). If price level was one in all countries, while it
would be possible only in ideal market economy, it would be no problem.
Then nominal GDP value would reflect its volume part. Unfortunately it
is not the case, because a large part of services and goods that are
included in GDP are not traded internationally. So, average (aggregated)
price level differs between countries. A lot of efforts are requiared to
separate GDP calculated in common currency and current prices in to
comparative price index and GDP volume. It is generally accepted that
the real economic strength is reflected in the GDP volume.

Eurostat data can be used to evaluate and compare GDP volumes. The
database offers purchasing power parity (PPP) calculations to evaluate
GDP in purchasing power standards (PPS). Such methodology eliminates
from GDP comparisons exchange rate fluctuations and different purchasing
powers in countries caused by the different price levels. GDP estimates
in PPS are widely used by international organizations to evaluate
countries economic strength. We are really interested to compare chosen
countries taking in to account different price levels observed there.

In the third figure, as in the ones before, we compare GDP per capita in
PPS of Baltics, Visegrad and Scandinavian countries. Such GDP estimates
make lower absolute differences between developed and developing
countries. It is easy to explain the change, having in mind that price
levels are higher in more developed countries (Penn effect).

![Fig.
3: GDP per capita in PPS of Baltics, Visegrad and Scandinavian countries
from 1995 to 2012 is shown in three different ways (Eurostat
data).](/uploads/2013/07/baltic-visegrad-scandinavia-gdp-pps-1995-2012-en.jpg "
GDP per capita in PPS of Baltics, Visegrad and Scandinavian
countries from 1995 to 2012 is shown in three different ways (Eurostat
data)."){#attachment_2513} 

It is important to notice, that when we take in to account the price
level differences between countries, we can get quite unexpected results
of BVP comparisons. For example in 2012 Lithuania becomes a leader in
Baltics and together with Estonia, they surpass Visegrad countries
Poland and Hungary. One can easily observe other changes of comparison
results between countries with similar development level. The newest
Eurostat data gives us even more surprises comparing inhabitants’ real
consumption. We will discuss it a bit later.

In the sense of long-term economic convergence the use of PPS does not
cause any substantial changes. Of course, GDP growth in PPS of all
countries, Fig. 3, graph (c), is significantly lower than in nominal GDP
case. However, gaps between countries, that must be fulfilled, are
respectively lower as well. So, quantitative convergence periods should
not change, obviously, thanks to Penn effect. Ranking of countries
according GDP growth rates remains very similar, even with the same
exceptions, Norway strongly steps in between Visegrad Group. Interesting
observation is that growth rates in PPS of Baltic countries are much
more uniform, than the growth rates calculated in Euros, Fig. 2. graph
(c). Notice that Latvia becomes slightly ahead comparing the growth
rates between Baltic countries. Such coincidence of economic growth
rates of Baltic countries observed almost in the period of 20 years,
even more stresses the need of theoretical study.

Notice that in Visegrad Group the case is different: Slovakia
significantly bypasses other countries, when Czech Republic
significantly lags, comparing growth rates. But if we bear in mind, that
Slovakia was less developed part of Czechoslovakia, it is possible that
Slovakia‘s higher convergence rate partly slowdowns convergence rate of
Czech Republic. If we considered these two countries as one, we would
get high level of uniform development for Visegrad countries as well.
More detailed look at the development of Czech Republic and Slovakia
could be very useful in understanding of economic convergence.

Although a use of PPP and PPS are not so important for the economic
convergence analyses, it brings substantial changes in GDP instantaneous
comparisons from the practical as well as theoretical point of view.
Valuation of Lithuanian economy using PPP should bring brighter view
even for the greatest skeptics of this country. Now, in sake of
curiosity, let’s focus on one more “surprise” regarding PPP valuation of
Lithuanian economy.

EU and OECD PPP research program attracts attention, than GDP per capita
is not the best way to measure inhabitants’ living standards. It offers
to use another indicator - actual individual consumption (AIC). This
indicator is a part of real GDP, when it calculated in expenditure
approach. Eurostat offers data for shorter - 2003-2012 period. We draw
AIC curves of Baltic and Visegrad countries in Fig. 4.

![Fig.
4: Actual individual consumption of Baltic and Visegrad countries
calculated by expenditure approach in
PPP.](/uploads/2013/07/baltic-visegrad-scandinavia-gdp-ppp-2003-2012-en.jpg "
Actual individual consumption of Baltic and Visegrad countries
calculated by expenditure approach in PPP."){#attachment_2514} 

AIC data shows significant differences in GDP structure of countries,
influenced by the internal economic policy. Baltic and Visegrad
countries mix up in their AIC ranking. AIC index includes all kinds of
individual consumption forms: direct individual consumption of goods and
services, consumption of goods and services provided by the governmental
or non-governmental organizations. Index value indicates what percentage
of real services and goods consumes countries inhabitant compared to the
average EU inhabitant consuming 100% of such services and goods.
Lithuania becomes a sound leader according the AIC valuation of Baltic
and Visegrad countries. Slovakia and Poland also are not far behind
having similar GDP structure and growth trend. While Czech Republic and
Hungary do not show any growth trends compared to EU average. Latvia by
increasing its AIC values managed to outrun Estonia and is in the same
position as Hungary. Eurostat data shows, that Baltic countries managed
to catch up and are outrunning Visegrad countries not only by GDP per
capita, but also by actual individual consumption. In Statistics you can
believe or not, but Lithuania’s AIC outruns Estonia’s by 23%.

The latest Eurostat data discussed here raises a lot of serious
questions. First of all, we need to understand why the Baltic countries
reaching development level of Visegrad Group keep their relatively high
growth rates. Secondly, what political and international macroeconomic
fundamentals determine the long term growth? Finally, how could be
possible to forecast economic development trends in mid-term at least?
Our ideas and proposals on the subject we are going to present in our
further articles.
