Title: Edge redirection network formation models
Date: 2013-11-04 07:57
Author: Aleksejus Kononovicius
Tags: interactive, networks, Barabasi-Albert model, Erdos-Renyi model, scale free network
Slug: edge-redirection-network-formation-models
Status: published
Image_url: uploads/2013/edge-redirection-network-formation-models.jpg

Previously we wrote about few of the most well
known and used network formation models \[cite id="Airoldi2011DSS"\]:
[Erdos-Renyi]({filename}/articles/2013/erdos-renyi-model.md),
[Watts-Strogatz]({filename}/articles/2013/watts-strogatz-model.md),
[Barabasi-Albert]({filename}/articles/2013/barabasi-albert-model.md),
[core-periphery
network]({filename}/articles/2013/core-periphery-network-models.md)
and [cellular
network]({filename}/articles/2013/cellular-network.md)
models. All these models are somewhat stylized and very simple - they
are able to reproduce just some small part of actual complexity observed
in the social networks. Thus it might be convenient to combine these
models into hybrid network formation models, which then would be able to
reproduce more empirically observed features.

One of the first steps away from the simple models and towards a more
realistic models might be introduction of the local interactions. For
example into the [Barabasi-Albert
model]({filename}/articles/2013/barabasi-albert-model.md).
Recall that in this model we had to keep track of the degrees of each
node. But is it possible to have this information in real life? What
would happen if we wouldn't have this information, but would explore the
network through the random selection (just like in the [Erdos-Renyi
model]({filename}/articles/2013/erdos-renyi-model.md))?<!--more-->

On the edge redirection networks
--------------------------------

Wouldn't it be more natural to generate scale-free networks using a
modified [Erdos-Renyi
model]({filename}/articles/2013/erdos-renyi-model.md)
than the [Barabasi-Albert
model]({filename}/articles/2013/barabasi-albert-model.md)?
Let us retain the purely uniform selection of the nodes of the original
[Erdos-Renyi
model]({filename}/articles/2013/erdos-renyi-model.md),
but in contrast to the original we will select only one "old" node to
connect to.

But not so fast! Let us with the probability \\\(  r(a,b) \\\) to
redirect the edge to the selected node's parent node (here \\\(  a \\\)
is a degree of the "old" target node and \\\(  b \\\) is a degree of the
parent node). Evidently the edge will not be redirected with the
probability \\\(  1-r(a,b) \\\). We can now separate the redirection
models into three groups (based on the asymptotic behavior of \\\( r(a,b) \\\)) - the hindered (if \\\(  b \rightarrow \infty \\\), then
\\\(  r \rightarrow 0 \\\)), constant probability (\\\( r=\mathrm{const} \\\)) and enhanced (if \\\(  b \rightarrow \infty \\\),
then \\\(  r \rightarrow 1 \\\)) redirection.

In case of the constant probability redirection we would obtain networks
identical to the ones generated by the [Barabasi-Albert
modeli]({filename}/articles/2013/barabasi-albert-model.md)
(\\\(  \alpha=1 \\\)) \[cite id="Gabel2013JStatMech, Gabel2013"\]. The
hindered redirection case also provides networks which are similar to
[Barabasi-Albert
model]({filename}/articles/2013/barabasi-albert-model.md)
networks, but now with \\\(  \alpha&lt;1 \\\) \[cite
id="Gabel2013JStatMech"\]. The enhanced redirection case is a more
interesting one - primarily, according to the authors, the network is
non-extensive \[cite id="Gabel2013"\]. In this case we should also
obtain a high dispersed network with multiple macro-hubs. \[cite
id="Gabel2013"\] mentions that these kind of networks are observed in
airline routes.

![Fig.  1: Highly dispersed networks shown in the article "Highly Dispersed
Networks" by Gabel et al. (the enhanced redirection was used). The green
nodes have a total degree of 1, blue nodes - have 2-20, while red ones -
larger than
20.]({static}/uploads/2013/edge-redirection-network-formation-models.jpg "Highly
dispersed networks shown in the article &quot;Highly Dispersed
Networks&quot; by Gabel et al.  (the enhanced redirection was used). The
green nodes have a total degree of 1, blue nodes - have 2-20, while red ones
- larger than 20."){#attachment_2525} 

Why are these models able to reproduce scale-free networks? Essentially
it happens due to the fact that higher degree nodes are more probable to
be selected as parent nodes, because of having more "routes" (child
nodes) leading to them.

This is all that we can briefly tell you about the edge redirection
network formation models. Note that this is only a brief introduction -
there more papers available on this topic (e.g., see the list of
references in \[cite id="Gabel2013JStatMech, Gabel2013"\] papers).

Interactive applet
------------------

Using the interactive applet you can observe how the network is formed
using edge redirection. Left panel of the applet shows the network
itself, while in the right one you can observe how the degree
probability density function evolves. Note that the probability density
function plot is plotted on the lg-lg axes. Also note that the nodes in
the left panel are colored based on their degree (if the degree equals
1, then they are green, if the degree is larger than 1, but smaller than
70% of largest degree, then they are blue, while in the other case they
become red).

In case of enhanced redirection we choose the following form of \\\( r(a,b) \\\) (though note that it is not unique choice):

\begin{equation}
 r(a,b) = 1 - b^{-\lambda} . 
\end{equation}

In case of hindered redirection we chose that:

\begin{equation}
 r(a,b) = b^{-\lambda} . 
\end{equation}

While in case of constant probability redirection we set that \\\( r(a,b) = \lambda \\\).

Note that with a large number of nodes (100 or more) the applet might
freeze and disrupt your browser operation, thus you should handle the
applet with care. If you would like to analyze or generate large network
consider downloading Gephi or obtaining other similar software packages.

[html5-interactive
url="/uploads/models/network-models/edge-redirection/index.html"
mode="iframe" height="320" width="480"]
