Title: Erdos-Renyi model
Date: 2013-07-29 07:01
Author: Aleksejus Kononovicius
Tags: Interactive models, Network models, Erdos-Renyi model, coursera, percolation
Slug: erdos-renyi-model
Status: published

Recently I have discovered an online
education system [Coursera](https://www.coursera.org/). While browsing
through the available courses I noticed one named "Social and Economic
Networks: Models and Analysis". Sadly it was already six weeks into the
eight week program, so I was not able to formally complete it. Yet the
knowledge I have obtained by viewing videos of this course enabled me to
prepare couple of posts for this website.

During the next couple of posts I will consider some of the well-known
network models. I'll start in this text from the Erdos-Renyi network
formation model, and later will continue with the Watts-Strogatz model
("small world" networks) and the Barabasi-Albert model ("scale-free"
networks).<!--more-->

Erdos-Renyi model and network properties
----------------------------------------

Erdos-Renyi model is one of the earliest network formation models. Thus
it is relatively simple - the edges are put completely at random.
Namely, we first have to generate \\\(  N \\\) isolated nodes. And
afterwards, while iterating through all possible pairs of nodes, we have
to put random edges between the pairs (i.e., make random connections)
with a certain probability \\\( p \\\).

Being that simple Erdos-Renyi network does not posses interesting
features, such as power law degree distribution, high levels of
clusterization and other observed in the real networks (and other
network formation models). The degree distribution of Erdos-Renyi
network is binomial, which is approximately Gaussian in the limit of
large \\\(  N \\\), while Poisson distribution (with \\\(  \lambda = Np \\\)) is also a great approximation of Erdos-Renyi network degree
distribution. The clusterization is low, there are no central hubs and
etc.

Yet the Erdos-Renyi networks are still important in the network theory
as they serve well as a benchmark tools. Namely, if certain property can
exist on this network, then it might be so that the property arises
purely at random and is not observed due to a more sophisticated
reasons.

It is also worthwhile to note that this network formation model is
somewhat related to the [percolation theory](/tag/percolation/). Imagine that a fully
connected graph. Now let us remove a certain number of edges from it.
How many edges could we randomly remove from a graph (network), for it
to be still connected (i.e., with no isolated nodes)? The answer is
pretty simple. We could remove edges with probability \\\(  1-p \\\),
where \\\(  p = \ln(N)/N \\\). Note that here \\\(  p \\\) stands for a
probability to create an edge in the Erdos-Renyi network! Try different
\\\(  p \\\) values, around the given, and see what happens with the
network.

Interactive applet
------------------

We provide an interactive HTML5 applet for the Erdos-Renyi network
formation model below. In this applet you can control both the numbers
of nodes, \\\(  N \\\), and the probability of putting and edge, \\\( p \\\), between each possible pair of nodes. Using the mouse wheel you can
zoom in and out of the picture. The new graph (network) is generated by
pressing "&gt;" button.

On the left panel you should see the Erdos-Renyi network, while on the
right panel we show the probability density of its nodes' degrees (blue
circles) approximated by the Poissonian distribution (red curve). The
obtained degree distribution should converge towards Poissonian in the
large number of nodes, \\\(  N \\\), limit (\\\(  p \\\) should also be
not too small).

[html5-interactive mode="iframe" height="270" width="480"
url="/uploads/models/network-models/erdos-renyi.html"]
