Title: V. Gontis: "Animal Spirits" - the old term of economics forcing us to reevaluate contemporary theories
Date: 2013-12-02 07:05
Author: Vygintas Gontis
Tags: Agent-based models, Economics, Gontis, financial markets, statistical physics
Slug: animal-spirits-the-old-term-of-economics-forcing-us-to-reevaluate-contemporary-theories
Status: published

The book by George A.
Akerlof and Robert J. Shiller "Animal Spirits, How Human Psychology
Drives the Economy, and Why It Matters for Global Capitalism" \[cite
id="Akerlof2009Princeton"\] has inspired me to share with you these
thoughts. John Maynard Keynes introduced the term "Animal spirits" in
1936 to describe the instincts, proclivities and emotions that
ostensibly influence and guide human behavior in business and so impact
the economic outcome and development. G. A. Akerlof and R. J. Shiller
provide in this book evidence that contemporary theory of economics
based on the hypotheses of efficient market and rational expectation
fails to explain economic processes in the periods of global crises.
They further develop the term of Animal Spirits seeking to explain the
evolution of global economy in the periods of crises and depression and
looking for the appropriate measures how to overcome the economic
slump.<!--more-->

Authors’ suggest characterizing the Animal Spirits by five human
behavioral features. First of them - confidence and its multipliers,
second - fairness, third - corruption and bad faith, forth - money
illusion or failure to account it and the fifth one - stories as the
main form of information people are used to deal with. They think that
all these features of agents acting in the economy make the development
unsustainable, unpredictable and condition the formation of global
economic and financial crises. There are no direct recommendations in
this book how to modify the contemporary theories of macroeconomics or
finance, nevertheless, there is sense of confidence that concept of
Animal Spirit can be very useful working out Governmental and Central
Bank policies to avoid or overcome economic and financial crises.

The new view at contemporary theory of economics is valuable for us as
providing additional arguments for the applications of statistical
physics in economic and other social systems. The continuing dispute
among econometricians, working in the framework of present theory of
economics, and econophysicists, trying to disengage from this framework,
could be protracted if economists themselves were not expressing
criticism against contemporary theory. The new view presented in the
book of Nobel prize winner 2013 R. J. Shiller probably will serve for
the development of new macroeconomic and financial theories.

In the previous essay, [Econophysics as a new view on the social
sciences](/ekonofizika-pastangos-naujai-pazvelgti-i-socialinius-mokslus/),
we already discussed the initiatives to use methods of statistical
physics for the analyses and modeling of social systems, which started
long before present global financial and economic crises. There we paid
more attention to another book \[cite id="Aoki2007Cambridge"\], written
by M. Aoki ir H. Yoshikawa. One of the main ideas developed in this book
is the proposition to reevaluate the macroeconomics from the point of
view of statistical physics. From our point of view both books are
written in very different styles, nevertheless, there is common sense
regarding limitations of contemporary theory of economics, which fails
to explain huge economic fluctuations. Though recipes how to improve
theory provided in these books are not identical, the background of
ideas is really common. We would characterize the common background as
necessity to deal with heterogeneous economic agents acting in
dynamically changing endogenous and exogenous circumstances.
Consequently the dynamics of social systems is a result of interactions
between heterogeneous agents and their groups and is not as simple as
response of averaged representative agent to exogenous information.

The modeling of economic and other social systems by heterogeneous
agents already is becoming a widely accepted research method with
practical applications. The idea that rational behavior of humans can be
replaced by zero-intelligence agents (Animal Spirit) is becoming a real
outbreak. The significant simplification of agents by classifying their
behavior gives an opportunity of quantitative description of their
dynamics, and in exceptional cases it leads to the macroscopic
description of the whole social system. For example, the herding model
formalized by A. Kirman is applicable for the modeling of ants’ colony
as well as for the modeling of financial markets. There is a research
group working in this direction in Lithuania, more information in
popular presentation about models in development and research you can
find on the web site <http://rf.mokslasplius.lt/>.
