Title: V. Gontis: Econophysics - brand new outlook into social sciences
Date: 2012-12-17 13:46
Author: Vygintas Gontis
Tags: Agent-based models, Economics, Stochastic models, A. Kononovicius, V. Gontis, financial markets, politics, sociology, statistical physics
Slug: econophysics-brand-new-outlook-into-social-sciences
Status: published

Econophysics is not a very well
known interdisciplinary field of research in Lithuania. There are very
few Lithuania based scientists who are related to this very young and
rapidly developing branch of Physics. Therefore we, being ones of the
few, feel an obligation to introduce Econophysics to the other
scientists, businessmen and the whole broader society. In this text we
will discuss the basic ideas, current trends and the most common
problems relevant to the field of Econophysics.

The name of Econophysics implies the application of physics, mostly the
methods taken from Statistical Physics, to the Economics. Though until
recently most of the econophysicists used to focus on the financial
markets. Currently the field is expanding very rapidly and now concerns
something more than just regular Economics or Finance - many physicists
now attempt to tackle problems in the other social sciences. For these
broader approaches there are other overlapping terms including
Sociophysics, Physics of Risk, Physics of Socio-Economic Systems and
other.

At this point we would like to stop the discussion on the use of the
terminology. Recall that the aim of this text is somewhat different from
that. We aim to familiarize you with the
Econophysics!<!--more-->

Economics need a scientific revolution
--------------------------------------

Most of the growing interest in Econophysics lies in the dissatisfaction
with Economics and Finance. Those fields were unable to deal with the
crisis. In this context the interest in the alternative approaches is
growing. And the Econophysics is a very interesting and promising
alternative. Some of the most well known econophysicists have published
many papers analyzing what is wrong with Economics, Finance and how the
application of Physics could improve the scientific understanding of
socio-economic systems.

The first one to do so was J. P. Bouchaud. In Nature (very prestigious
journal for scientists in the natural sciences) he published a claim
that "Economics need a scientific revolution" \[cite
id="Bouchaud2008Nature"\]. This paper is one of the most well written
and well cited recently published papers on the topic. His main point
was that Economics is based on wrong assumptions. These assumptions were
usually made to obtain mathematical simplicity, while neglecting the
true nature of the ongoing process. The history of Economics serves as
an excellent proof for this claim. Most economists, throughout the
history, shun what physicists like to rely on - the experiment. This bad
habit can be easily explained by the fact doing experiment in the
socio-economic system is a very daunting and in the most cases
impossible task, but it is not an excuse to completely reject the
shortcomings of the Economic theory. This rejection leads to the
ideological warfares between different scientists in the same field and
the complete neglection of the aim to understand observed phenomena.
Physics and physicists, having a lot of experience with the complex
natural systems, could help at least partly deal with these complex
problems.

J. P. Bouchaud has further developed his ideas on the complexity of
socio-economic systems in his paper published a year later in Physics
World, another prominent journal, \[cite id="Bouchaud2009PhysWorld"\].
To keep article short we will move on to the work by another
econophysicist, thus if you would like to follow the thoughts by J. P.
Bouchaud visit our references section for the link.

B. M. Roehner's review
----------------------

Another interesting work we would like to consider is a review of
"worries, hopes and prospects" in Econophysics \[cite
id="Roehner2010SciCul"\]. We found it especially interesting, because of
its broadness and consistency - the work considers most of the current
applications of Physics to socio-economic systems and also a scenarios
for the future research in the field. Some utmostly important topics are
discussed in the paper:

-   Can applications of the ideas from Physics and Chemistry provide
    valid and successful approaches to the socio-economic systems?
-   Why the communication between the econophysicists and economist has
    not improved in the last 15 years?
-   How well the physicists are applying their traditional approaches to
    the new field, for them, of social sciences?
-   Why the rapidly developing research of complex systems rejects
    almost any possibility to simplify the system?

B. M. Roehner considers the first publications by physicists on
Economics and other social systems to be the start of Econophysical
research. In such case one can say that Econophysics was born in XIX
century. Though, according to Roehner, the modern developments
Econophysics should be primarily related to the talk given by H. Eugene
Stanley in Statistical Physics conference in Kalkuta in the 1995. At the
time H. E. Stanley has also made numerous attempts to setup regular
meetings of the econophysicists in Boston. Alongside Boston school
numerous other centers and groups were formed, each of them having their
own views, ideas, concepts and methods. This pluralism of ideas was
encouraged and nurtured - different theoretical and experimental
approaches were made and developed. Eventually the research has started
to consider many varying socio-economic topics - Econophysics is now not
only limited to the financial markets.

Next B. M. Roehner delves into the problem of intercommunication between
physicists and economists. He claims that some neoliberal societies (the
most prominent of them is [Mont Pelerin
Society](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mont_Pelerin_Society "Mont Pelerin Society on Wikipedia"))
are more concerned with propaganda of neoliberal ideas rather than doing
science. These organizations tend to have more ideological goals than
scientific interests. Therefore the current situation in Economics might
be even compared to religious traditions (these ideas are more broadly
developed in \[cite id="Nelson2001UniversityPark"\]). In our opinion
this might explain the economists' conservativeness, though the
physicists should not see it as the main reason for the
miscommunication.

In our opinion...
-----------------

It would be more appropriate to acknowledge that socio-economic
complexity is overwhelming even for an accomplished physicist. Even for
them it is no such trivial task to discover unique quantitative
principles underlying the socio-economic behavior. Physicists
approaching social systems tend to neglect the wonderful experience of
the greatest scientific achievements. They tend to solve most problems
using growing computational power and neglect the excellence of human
mind. While in order to achieve true understanding social systems should
be reduced to the multi-agent systems.

In our opinion, the mechanistic understanding of social reality, namely
then the complex social system is being replaced with unnatural
mechanically interacting agent-based systems, will not yield sufficient
results. Growing computational power might enable solution of the
extremely complex problems and thus enable modelling of complex
mechanically interacting system, but it would be naive to expect that
such model would sufficiently reproduce empirical data. We believe that
social agents interact in non-deterministic ways - their interaction is
random and thus governed by the statistical laws. Therefore in order to
understand social complex systems one should aim to discover its'
macroscopic laws and then attempt to dissect the system into subsystems
interacting on statistical basis, which ought to be based on the
empirical evidence or (if not possible) on the theoretical assumptions.
These ideas are also found in the work by economists \[cite
id="Aoki2007Cambridge"\], in which they attempt to reformulate
Macroeconomic theory in terms of Statistical Physics.

It is important to note that such ideas might be applicable not only
towards Macroeconomics, but also towards the financial markets,
population and opinion dynamics, marketing theory and etc. Our own works
(brief review is given in \[cite id="Kononovicius2012IntSys"\]) are
based on the macroscopic description of the complex social systems using
the non-linear stochastic differential equations, while also including
agent-based models with random jump-like interaction. Only time will
show if made a wise decision, but at the moment we are happy to follow
similar path as some of the economists.
