Title: Aleksejus Kononovicius: Impressions from the Interdisciplinarity conference
Date: 2012-01-30 09:00
Author: Aleksejus Kononovicius
Tags: General information, Economics, A. Kononovicius, FuturICT, conference
Slug: impresions-interdisciplinarity-conference
Status: published

Last week,
on 26th and 27th of January, [Lithuanian Society of Young
Researchers](http://ljms.lt) held a conference "Interdisciplinarity: How
to Make it Work". During the conference presenters, which included both
scientists and officers of varying institutions, from all over the world
and Lithuania have shared with the attendees their success stories and
provided ideological grounds for the discussions on the
interdisciplinarity.

For me the most important part was the aforementioned ideological
background. Working in the context of Physics of Risk it is important
for us to see where do we actually stand. Are we still in physics or
maybe we have moved to the other domains (ex. economics, financial
mathematics or maybe even into the brand new independent field
econophysics?). So in this text I will attempt to share and develop some
interesting thoughts heard during the conference.<!--more--> I have
found K. Kirtiklis paraphrase "Embrace the object not the field"
(original phrase by J. R. Beniger \[cite id="Beniger1993JComm"\])
thought the most interesting. Further one could develop it by drawing
analogy between the hobbits of J. R. R. Tolkien and scientists working
"in between the classical disciplines" (thought drawn from the A.
Gedutis presentation) - they take up very challenging quests, go to an
interesting journeys and comeback not better, not worse, but slight
different from the average Joes.

Interestingly enough interdisciplinarity has very interesting, non
self-evident, structure. Most commonly one sees the interaction between
two disciplines with the three possible states - discipline "A",
discipline "B" and something in between "AB". While the interaction is
far more complex:

-   One might have *multidisciplinary* interaction. In such case there
    is no actual integration - just the scientists from the different
    fields attempt to tackle the same problems. Scientists in the
    different fields do not exchange information.
-   *Pluridisciplinarity* is very similar to the previously mentioned
    *multidisciplinary*, but the scientists interact among themselves
    exchanging their point of views. Though they still retain their
    disciplinary backgrounds and their communication efforts are not
    administrated or specifically encouraged.
-   *Interdisciplinarity* implies that the communication is being
    externally administrated. Teams of scientists with different
    backgrounds are formed and scientists attempt to solve the same
    problem on different levels considered by their scientific
    backgrounds.
-   The tightest intergration - forming single general ideological
    framework - is referred by the term *transdisciplinarity*.

There are claims that currently econophysics is at the weakest
integration level, but in the nearest future it should become
transdisciplinary field \[cite id="Jovanovic2013"\]. In the recent years
there were some papers by physicists which use the results and ideas
from non-physical fields to yield interesting results (for example see
our \[cite id="Daniunas2011ICCGI, Reimann2011PhysA, Gontis2012ACS"\]
works.). While [FuturICT](http://www.futurict.eu) flagship project has
the full potential to organize and administrate European (though not
only European) scientists from the different fields in order to create
single large and very general ideological product.

Efforts by FuturICT reminds the dominician approach towards education.
The dominicians though that each person should an expert at a certain
narrow field and that institutions should manage the communication of
these experts in order to achieve external unity of science (according
to S. Fuller's presentation). Though there is an alternative approach -
franciscan approach (this approach was discussed by different
presenters, though the mostly developed it was in R. Marcinkevičienė's
presentation). The franciscans attempted to educate each person as an
expert in varying fields unifying the science internally in each
individual. Nowadays to implement this approach one would need lots of
time and limitless financial resources, because one would need to foster
entire generation who would think "out of the box" - think without
specific specialization or fixed approach. This path would be also a
very risky one as there is fixed infrastructure of journal and
publishers each with their own fixed publishing culture. The "universal"
scientist might not be able to find their place in there. Thus despite
the fact that the results might be interesting and promising, but this
path is just too risky and costly to be implemented. Though its time
might come some day in the further future.

I would like to end the text with a thought, which was in focus since
the first minutes of the conference. In the beginning science was
uniform field. Later it was divided into the different independent
fields as for human it is easier to solve simplified reduced problems.
In the recent years scientific community has started to face problems
with higher degree of complexity. Some very important systems might not
be correctly understood with the reductionist approach! Thus they must
be studied from the many different point of views in order to be able to
understand it as a whole in the full detail. Thus the different fields
of science must cooperate in order to be able to face the increasing
complexity of analyzed systems. This cooperation should lead once again
to the certain unification of science, its method and principles. Or in
K. Pearson's words (from "The grammar of science"):  

> The field of science is unlimited; its material is endless, every
> group of natural phenomena, every phase of social life, every stage of
> past or present development is material for science. The unity of all
> science consists alone in its method, not in its material.
