Title: Stationary distribution of the poll-delayed voter model
Date: 2025-05-06 08:00
Author: Aleksejus Kononovicius
Tags: agent-based models, interactive, voter model, opinion dynamics, opinion polls, delayed models
Slug: stationary-distribution-of-poll-delayed-voter-model
Status: draft
Image_url: uploads/2025/stationary-distribution-of-poll-delayed-voter-model.png

In the last few posts, I have introduced you to two variations of the voter
model enhanced with [polling mechanism](/tag/opinion-polls/). These two
variations differed in whether the announcement of poll outcome is
[delayed]({filename}/articles/2025/poll-delayed-voter-model.md) or
[not]({filename}/articles/2025/polled-voter-model.md). This time, we
will explore the distributions obtained from these models.
<!--more-->

## Temporal evolution of ensemble PMFs

Typically, we are interested in the stationary distributions generated by
the models, as we would expect these to be compared against the empirical
data. While this approach might be wrong (see posts on [compartmental voter
model](/tag/compartmental-voter-model/)) in a sense that the data is spatial
and has inherent spatial correlations. Nevertheless, it is still a valuable
tool in understanding the effects various mechanisms might have.

The interactive app in this post determines the stationary distributions by
simulating ensembles (collections of model instances that evolve under the
same parameters and start from the same initial conditions) over time. Each
frame you see in the app is a snapshot of the order parameter value
distribution across multiple simulated instances (\\\( 10^3 \\\) for each
model) at a fixed time point (given in the label above the plot).

Initially, the probability mass function (abbr. PMF) over the ensembles will
be relatively narrow and concentrated around the initial condition. As time
passes, the ensemble PMFs will spread out (their variance will grow). At
a certain, the variance growth will settle down, and the model will reach
stationary PMF. However, the exact shape in which stationary PMF settles
depends on the polling period as well.

If the polling period is short, the PMFs of both models will approach the
dark gray curve. The dark gray curve shows beta-binomial PMF, representing
stationary distribution expected to be obtained from the standard noisy
voter model with the same \\\( \varepsilon\_i \\\) parameter values. For
longer polling periods, the shape of the stationary distribution will be
different.

![Ensemble PMF after large number of polls when polling period is
short]({static}/uploads/2025/stationary-distribution-of-poll-delayed-voter-model-short.png
"Ensemble PMF of both models (red - with delay, blue - without) after large
number of polls when polling period is short. Dark gray curve shows
stationary PMF expected from the standard noisy voter model with the same
parameters.")

Both models will have the same (or at least very similar-looking) stationary
PMFs for very long polling periods. Longer polling periods allow the
simulated system to incorporate previous poll information fully. One might
say that the simulated system manages to catch up to the most recent
information.

![Ensemble PMF after large number of polls when polling period is
long]({static}/uploads/2025/stationary-distribution-of-poll-delayed-voter-model-long.png
"Ensemble PMF of both models (red - with delay, blue - without) after large
number of polls when polling period is long. Notice that both red and blue
curves have similar shape and are narrower than the gray curve.")

The interesting thing happens for intermediate polling periods. The model
curves are different! The stationary PMF of the model with delays for the
intermediate polling periods is narrower (with a lower variance) than
the model without delays. I find it hard to comprehend the physical reason
why this happens, but it follows from the Yule-Walker equations, which we
will cover in a later post.

![Ensemble PMF after large number of polls when polling period is
intermediate]({static}/uploads/2025/stationary-distribution-of-poll-delayed-voter-model.png
"Ensemble PMF of both models (red - with delay, blue - without) after large
number of polls when polling period is intermediate. Notice the minor, yet
noticeable, difference between the red and blue curves.")

## Interactive app

At this point, we invite you to check the insights using the interactive app
below. One interesting the to check would be to make \\\( X(0) \\\) and \\\(
A\_{-1} \\\) different. This change will not affect the ensemble PMF of the
model with no delays (blue curve). In contrast, the ensemble PMF of the
model with delays (red curve) will jump around initially (as long as the
simulated instances are strongly cross-correlated).

[html5-interactive width="520" height="310" mode="iframe"
url="/uploads/models/voter/poll-mechanism/distribution.html"]

