Title: Beta prime distribution
Date: 2026-06-02 08:00
Author: Aleksejus Kononovicius
Tags: interactive, statistics, power-law distributions, voter model, Kirman model, R. Kazakevicius
Slug: beta-prime-distribution
Status: published
Image_url: uploads/2026/beta-prime-distribution.png

Have you heard of the beta prime distribution before? Until recently, I
hadn't either. My colleague, [Rytis Kazakevičius](/tag/r-kazakevicius/),
recently surprised me by pointing out that the distribution we have been
repeatedly encountering in nonlinear transformations of the noisy [voter
model](/tag/voter-model/) has actually a proper name. It is known as the
beta prime distribution. And our history with this distribution, goes back
much further.
<!--more-->

## Context and derivation

It goes back to [the agent-based herding model of financial
markets]({filename}/articles/2011/agent-based-herding-model-financial-markets.md)
[cite id="Kononovicius2012PhysA"]. In that paper we have used [Kirman
model](/tag/kirman-model/) to simulate the switching behavior between
chartist and fundamentalist trading strategies. While the fraction of
chartists (or fundamentalists) is distributed according to the Beta
distribution (as [Kirman model](/tag/kirman-model/) is a variation of the
[voter model](/tag/voter-model/)), the absolute returns generated by the
model did follow some kind of [power-law
distribution](/tag/power-law-distributions/). That distribution is exactly
the beta prime distribution.

In [the agent-based herding model of financial
markets]({filename}/articles/2011/agent-based-herding-model-financial-markets.md)
[cite id="Kononovicius2012PhysA"] we have shown that under the [Walrasian
market](/tag/walrasian-market/) assumption the long-term log-returns of the
[financial markets](/tag/financial-markets/) can be modeled as a ratio of
chartists and fundamentalists. If we let \\\( x \\\) to denote the fraction
chartists in the market (then the fraction of fundamentalists is given by
\\\( 1-x \\\)), then the long-term log-returns will be given by

\begin{equation}
y = \frac{x}{1-x} . \label{eq:main-transform}
\end{equation}

This transformation not only allows us to explore the dynamics in the
[financial markets](/tag/financial-markets/), but also heterogeneous
diffusion process in general. In a series of more recent papers [cite
id="Kazakevicius2021AnoVM,Kazakevicius2023PRE,Kazakevicius2026CSF"] we have
used it as a basis for a generalized nonlinear transformation of the noisy
[voter model](/tag/voter-model/). Though notably, the beta prime
distribution arises only for the transformation given by
\eqref{eq:main-transform}.

Now, if the fraction of agents (lets say chartists) \\\( x \\\) is
distributed according to \\\( \mathcal{B}e \left(\alpha,\beta\right) \\\),
then from the conservation of probability mass,

\begin{equation}
p\_Y(y) d y = p\_X(x) d x ,
\end{equation}

and for our particular case, we have that,

\begin{equation}
p\_Y(y) = p\_X\left(\frac{y}{1+y}\right) \left| \frac{d}{dy}
    \left(\frac{y}{1+y}\right) \right| =
    \frac{y^{\alpha-1}\left(1+y\right)^{-\alpha-\beta}}{B\left(\alpha,\beta\right)} .
\end{equation}

Which is exactly the probability density function of the beta prime
distribution.

## Interactive app

Use the interactive app below to explore how the beta-distributed random
values get transformed into the beta prime-distributed values. The left plot
of the app shows the probability density function of the generated beta
random variables, while the right plot shows the probability density
function of the transformed variables. In both plots, the gray curves
represent the corresponding theoretical probability density functions.

[html5-interactive width="520" height="280" mode="iframe"
url="/uploads/models/stats/models/beta-prime-distribution/beta-transformation.html"]

