Title: Noise generated by a single charge carrier
Date: 2023-12-19 08:00
Author: Aleksejus Kononovicius
Tags: Interactive models, spectral density, shot noise, Lorentzian, random telegraph noise
Slug: noise-generated-by-single-charge-carrier
Status: published
Image_url: uploads/2023/noise-generated-by-single-charge-carrier.png

[Shot noise](/tag/shot-noise/) can be observed in variety of materials,
devices and systems. Let us consider one of the simplest examples from
physics: noise generated by trapping and detrapping of a single charge
carrier.
<!--more-->

## Telegraph signal

Let us postulate that if a charge carrier is free, then a flow of current is
observed. Likewise, if the charge carrier is trapped, then the flow stops.
Thus we are observing a signal with non-overlapping rectangular pulses (as
shown in the figure below). Note that such signal is reminiscent of a
telegraph signal.

![Fragment of a signal with non-overlapping rectangular
pulses.]({static}/uploads/2023/noise-generated-by-single-charge-carrier-sample-rtn.png
"Fragment of a signal with non-overlapping rectangular pulses.")

The term trapping time is used for the time the charge carrier spends free
(as it describes the time it takes for the charge carrier to be trapped). We
use symbol \\\( \theta \\\) to denote it. The symbol \\\( \tau \\\) is used
to denote the time it takes the charge carrier to escape. Effectively this
means that charge carrier is detrapped, and thus the term detrapping time is
used.

## Poissonian random telegraph noise

As we have seen [before](/tag/point-process/) simplest physical assumption
would be that the escape probability is uniform in time (namely, that there
are no [ageing effects](/tag/ageing-effects/). This leads to a mathematical
assumption that trapping and detrapping times follow exponential
distribution with respective parameters \\\( \lambda\_\theta \\\) (trapping
rate) and \\\( \lambda\_\tau \\\) (detrapping rate).

Derivation of the [spectral density](/tag/spectral-density/) is a bit more
involved than for the [Poisson point
process]({filename}/articles/2023/poisson-process-psd.md), but follows
exactly the same trail of complex algebra. The general result (e.g.,
obtained in [cite id="Kononovicius2023rtn"]) is

\begin{equation}
S\left(f\right)=\frac{a^{2}\bar{\nu}}{\pi^{2}f^{2}}\mathrm{Re}\left[\frac{\left(1-\chi\_{\theta}\left(f\right)\right)\left(1-\chi\_{\tau}\left(f\right)\right)}{1-\chi\_{\theta}\left(f\right)\chi\_{\tau}\left(f\right)}\right],
\end{equation}

with \\\( \chi\_\theta(f) \\\) and \\\( \chi\_\tau(f) \\\) standing for the
characteristic functions of trapping and detrapping time distributions. As
for the exponential distribution (with rate \\\( \lambda \\\)) we have

\begin{equation}
\chi(f) = \frac{\lambda}{\lambda - 2 \pi \mathrm{i} f} ,
\end{equation}

the [spectral density](/tag/spectral-density/) will have [Lorentzian
shape](/tag/lorentzian/):

\begin{equation}
S\left(f\right)=\frac{4a^{2}\bar{\nu}}{\left(\lambda\_{\theta}+\lambda\_{\tau}\right)^{2}+4\pi^{2}f^{2}}.
\end{equation}

Namely, for low frequencies (lower than \\\( \left(\frac{\lambda\_\theta +
\lambda\_\tau}{2 \pi}\right)^2 \\\)) the [spectral
density](/tag/spectral-density/) will be flat, while for higher frequencies
\\\( S(f) \\\) will decay as \\\( 1/f^2 \\\). There will be a very narrow
region of frequencies where the switch between the [white
noise](/tag/white-noise/) and [Brownian-like noise](/tag/Brownian-motion/)
occurs.

## Interactive app

Let us verify the analytical result by doing numerical simulation. The
numerical results are shown as red curves (series in the top plot, and
[spectral density](/tag/spectral-density/) in the bottom plot) and
theoretical curve is plotted in black (present only in the bottom plot).
Note that as you change the rates the frequency at which the transition
occurs changes, but the effect is symmetric (namely, for the [spectral
density](/tag/spectral-density/) plot it doesn't matter which rate you
change).

[html5-interactive width="520" height="480" mode="iframe"
url="/uploads/models/random-telegraph-noise/poiss.html"]

Note: The app was recently updated with an additional parameter \\\(
N_{success} \\\). It will be discussed in a forthcoming post (the link will
be added after that post is published). When exploring the app in the
context of this post simply keep the default \\\( N_{success} = 1 \\\).
